We're doing everyone's favorite thing now, which is testing.
Some people get pumped about it, other people are like, why are you wasting my time?
I'm probably somewhere in the middle. I like tests when they prevent me from wasting time in
the future and I hate tests that prevent that waste my time now and don't help me in the future.
So again, I've been all over the map over the years of how I felt about testing. I went all the way
from I can't be bothered, I got to ship stuff. I've been always like, let's do TDD. I've never
actually been that militant about it. And I'm kind of more back towards like, let's write less tests
that I like and let's not write tests that don't tell me anything. So I'm on the side of the camp
that's like, let's test less. Yeah. Steve Kinney just released a testing fundamentals course.
And I like what he said, which was when you get to the point where you feel overwhelmed with
how many things are going on in your head, as far as the business rules and the code and whatever,
when you feel that sort of like overwhelm or anxiety, like that's at that point, that's like
a really great place to introduce tests because it can kind of like reduce that cognitive load
that you're going to break something or forgot to think of a certain use case or whatever.
That's a good way of putting it. I like that. Steve's a smart guy when it comes to that kind
of stuff too. So I would say definitely check out his course. I wanted to show you how to test this
app because I think there's some good things to do in here, but I don't know. I'm not the person
that writes a ton of tests. The place where I find tests super useful is when someone gives
me an issue that here's a bug that we need to go fix, I actually find a really good way to start
is to write the test that would have caught that. And then you can be kind of confident later when
you come back to it later. It's like, okay, I wrote this test beforehand. Now it's passing.
Now I can launch it. And now I have a test to go out to production with it that we probably
won't regress this way again. But I'm a really big on, I want tests to fail fast. I want them
to fail loudly and I want them to be testing something important. And if it's not doing all
three of those things, I generally don't want that test. I like integration tests, like big
suites that cover like user experiences, like around something like this user can log in and
buy something. Right. But I only want a few of those because if you've ever maintained like big
suites of Selenium tests, you know what I'm talking about where you spend half of your life
fighting tests, like where it's like false positives or false negatives or something like that.
So in those cases, I want a few tests that I care deeply about. And then if I don't care deeply about
it, or it's too finicky, I just delete it. Like deleting tests should be something that you do
on a regular basis. I do feel strongly about that. So now that I've given you all the disclaimers of
your learning from a crotchety old man about testing, I just wanted you to know my perspective
on it. There's other people out there that are way more, let's test all the things, let's test
none of the things that I'm more towards, let's test fewer things kind of side of the camp.
So we're going to test with vitest today, which is a really cool thing made by the VT people themselves.
It's really nice because we don't have to set it up again. Like in the old days when we were writing
like mocha tests and stuff like that, you had to set up everything by hand. And the nice thing about
vitest is that it reads your VT config and it just uses that, which is nice because we don't have to
write any config, I don't think, not for a while at least. It's designed to be a drop in replacement
for Jest, which is what I used to teach for this class. Jest was made by Facebook and is now
OpenJS, so it's a totally open foundation. And vitest is just mimicking what Jest is like,
and Jest was mimicking what Jasmine was like. So if you've written Jasmine, Jest, or vitest,
they're all mimicking Jasmine originally. I think I even taught Jasmine for one of the courses here.
Certainly mocha. I've taught a lot of different testing software because the flavor of the day
tends to change quite a bit. Let's talk about vitest. I'm going to cancel my VT server here
for a little bit, and I'm going to npm install. I'm just going to copy this from my notes here.
Vitest and then testing library and happydom.
So just to show you here, vitest 2.13, testing libraries at React at 16.01, and happydom at 15.7.4.
Okay, vitest, I just explained to you what that is. That's the testing suite harness for Veet.
Testing library slash React, this is a bunch of helper tools for writing React tests.
It is definitely the one that everyone uses now. Years and years and years ago, Airbnb released
one called Enzyme that people used for a long time, and it was finicky as hell. And now people
use this instead. This is much easier to use, so definitely use this. And then happydom is a
is a synthetic browser environment. So we used to use one called jsdom.
It was just massive and it was quite slow, and someone got kind of sick of waiting on
tests apparently, and so they stripped that down and made happydom, which is the much smaller
version of this. It goes much faster. Has the benefit of being faster, has the downside of
being less complete, right? So if you're doing strange stuff with browsers, which we all want
to do, happydom might fail or might pass unexpectedly. So do be aware of that. That
being said, I've never had that problem, to be honest with you. Cool. All right. So we have all
those things now. We're going to go inside our directory here and we're going to make a directory
called underscore underscore tests underscore underscore. So again, this is a Python thing
that they kind of brought over to JavaScript, the double underscore on either side. And that is
a signal to any future user that it's a magical name. I'm not making that up. That's what they
call it. And it's magical in the sense that it's important that it be called that because the
library that it's going to be used with is looking for that name specifically. So the double underscore
on either side means don't change the name of this or you're going to break stuff, right?
That's why you see the underscore underscore init underscore underscore dot
PY for Python stuff. That's why it's called with the double underscores.
Okay. So whatever we put in here, V test is just going to assume as a test. So you can call it
whatever you want. I'm still going to call my stuff app dot test dot JSX or app dot spec dot
JSX. Either one's fine. But you don't have to, if it's under the double underscore directory,
um, by the same token, I'm not going to do this right now, but you can also just put it in the
directly here. And it's also looking for files called app dot test, you know, something dot test
dot JSX. Both of those, the test will find your tests automatically and run them.
For some reason, I'm going to do both. I'm going to do both the double underscores and the dot test.
Okay. So go to package dot JSON. We have all of the files that we're going to use. We're going to
go to package dot JSON. We have all of our V test stuff in here right there.
Test. Just change this to be V test like that. That's it. And it's smart enough to be able to
read the V dot config dot JS. So we don't have to, we don't have to configure it any more than that.
Oh, you know, there's one thing we need to configure, but we can put it directly into our
V to config. We don't have to make a new file.
Okay. So in your VIT directory here, we're just going to add one more thing, test, environment,
and we're going to do it in Happydom. Just have to tell which browser environment that you want
to do it in. Momentarily, I'm going to show you what's coming in V test, which they're going to
do it with Playwright. That's kind of the new hotness coming in. And I tried to build this
course with Playwright. It's just not ready yet. I just didn't feel comfortable telling you to do
it yet. So we're going to stick with Happydom. I'm going to show you how to set up Playwright
towards the end, but just know there's still gremlins and goblins in there. You got to be
careful. Okay. So we're ready to go. Everything's ready to write tests.
Um, just so you know, if you do need to write a specific V to config for your V test environment,
you can write vitest.config.js, and this will be a specific V to config for your V test environment.
We'll do that actually towards the end. Just be aware that you have to tell to extend your
current V to config or else it will ignore it. And then you can get into weird places.
But again, we'll talk about that here in a bit. We don't have to do that right now because
luckily everything remains the same for us. So we're going to create a file called pizza,
and you can either call this test.jsx or spec. Either of those fine with me. I think I called
them spec in the past. I'm going to call it test this time. Just go with what the mood suits. We
just want to test that the alt text renders. Like imagine that we got slapped by a, you know,
lawsuit or a violation for not being accessible enough because our images didn't have alt text,
and we want to make sure we need all pizzas to have alt text on them. And we're going to
write a test that ensures that. I don't know, making stuff up here, but that's what we're going to do.
So we're going to import render from app testing library slash react. We're going to import
expect and test from the test and import pizza from, as you might have guessed, dot dot slash
pizza. Okay. Now we're going to go in and we're going to say test this string that we put in here.
I don't really care what you put in. Some people have very strong opinions of how you structure
these. This is my only strong tip to give you here. I just want you to put something in here
that says this test failed that you know which test failed. So alt text renders on image. That's
what I have here. If I see that in my, or on pizza images, it would probably be even better.
It will tell you that it failed in pizza dot test dot JSX. But just make sure that this is
descriptive of what you're actually testing. And at a glance, you can tell what failed if it tells
you that this failed. Okay. We're going to make this an async function.
And we're going to say const name equals my favorite pizza.
Const source equals, I just put in like a placeholder one. Pick some is one that I've
been using lately and dot photos slash 200. So this is just a, I think if I just open it here,
I can show you. It should just be a random image, right? So that's what it is today.
Okay. Const screen equals render. And you just render out whatever you want to test.
Const pizza name equals name description equals super cool pizza and image equals source.
Okay. Const IMG equals screen dot get by role
image. And then we just write some expectations here. Expect image dot source to be source.
And expect image dot alt to be name. Very simple test here. But kind of wanted to just like easy
into a little bit of like what testing looks like with Vitest. Render. This works like the,
you know, the root dot render that we have from React DOM. But this is all being done in Node.js
synthetically. So it's being much faster than it could be done in the browser.
So we render that here. We get this thing called screen. This comes from React's testing library,
which is a render result. And it has a bunch of functions available to it.
But one of them is this get by role. I don't know if you noticed, but when I said screen dot,
there's a lot of methods on this. It's like ways to get stuff out of your whatever you're looking
for. And they do this kind of interesting way of testing. We all want to do it jQuery style where
give me this class or this ID or something like that. And sometimes I still kind of long for those
days because it makes a lot of sense for me to do it that way. But let me tell you why. I think
there's this better even if it makes me think a little bit harder. Lord knows I don't want to
think that hard. It's very user based. Right? It's very based on how is the person perceiving
this? How are they using it? As opposed to as me, the developer, what's the CSS class?
The user does not care if the CSS class is working or not. They do care if they can see the div or
the image or not. Does that make sense? So they kind of change the focus around. In this case,
get by role, image is a role, right? It's a thing that a user would experience. So in this case,
we know pizza only has one image. So we can just say get by role image and be confident that that's
going to be the only thing there. So that's why this works. But there's a bunch of them.
Let's see if I can even show you. Yes, there's a bunch of things here. Get the fee, get the form,
get the heading. The heading will be like the H2 or the H1 of it or something like that.
But it's interesting. These are all things that they're very focused on. What would a user feel
here? What would they experience? And then you do it that way. I'll show you later how to do it
with test ID, which is kind of approaching more what we want is like, hey, I just want to get this
thing. I don't know what role it's going to be, but I want this thing. I'll show you how to do that.
Okay, so that is the most basic test. Let's go ahead and see if it works.
So I'm just going to say npm run test, or if you're feeling extra lazy, npm test does work,
or if you're feeling yet the laziest, npm t works specifically just for test.
Lo and behold, we have written a test that works. Now, I am always extremely suspicious
when my tests pass the first time that I write them that I probably f'd it up somewhere, right?
So when that happens, on the rare occasions it does, I was like, I should go break this to make
sure it actually breaks, right? So let's go break it. Breaking things fun. We want all text to be
to lol no, right? And now, if I look at my test now, this was expected to be this, but I was
expecting it to be my favorite pizza, and instead I received lol no, right? That's what we were
expecting. And now, if I go back and I fix it again, pizza test, sorry, not that, pizza.jsx.
Save it. Lo and behold, it is working.